RFC(0043): CKB softfork activation (#349)
nervosnetwork/rfcs: rfcs/0000-ckb-softfork-activation/0000-ckb-softfork-activation.md

## Specification

### Parameters

Each softfork deployment is specified by the following per-chain parameters (further elaborated below):

1. The `name` specifies a very brief description of the softfork, reasonable for use as an identifier.
2. The `bit` determines which bit in the `version` field of the block is to be used to signal the softfork lock-in and activation. It is chosen from the set {0,1,2,...,28}.
3. The `start_epoch` specifies the first epoch in which the bit gains meaning.
4. The `timeout_epoch` specifies an epoch at which the miner signaling ends. Once this epoch has been reached, if the softfork has not yet locked_in (excluding this epoch block's bit state), the deployment is considered failed on all descendants of the block.
5. The `threshold` specifies the minimum ratio of block per epoch, which indicate the locked_in of the softfork during the epoch.

> 6. The `minimum_activation_epoch` specifies the epoch at which the softfork is allowed to become active.

Reviewer: I suggest rename `minimum_activation_epoch` to `activation_epoch`. With a `minimum_` prefix, it implies "the softfork can be activated at any epoch after this epoch". But the wanted behavior is to activate the softfork immediately at this activation epoch.

Reviewer: Just found that `minimum_activation_epoch` is actually accurate after reading BIP8 and BIP9 again.

Author: There is a similar discussion here, https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/21377/files#r598896420

### Selection guidelines
The following guidelines are suggested for selecting these parameters for a softfork:

1. `name` should be selected such that no two softforks, concurrent or otherwise, ever use the same name.
2. `bit` should be selected such that no two concurrent softforks use the same bit.
3. `start_epoch` can be set soon after software with parameters is expected to be released.
4. `timeout_epoch` should be set to an epoch when it is considered reasonable to expect the entire economy to have upgraded by, probably a month, 180 epochs after `start_epoch`.
5. `threshold` should be 90% or 75% for testnet.
6. `minimum_activation_epoch` should be set to several epochs after `timeout_epoch` if the `start_epoch` is to be very soon after software with parameters is expected to be released.
Where the locked_in threshold is reached, softforks are guaranteed to activate eventually but not until `minimum_activation_epoch` after signal tracking starts, allowing users, developers, and organizations to prepare software, announcements, and celebrations for that event.

### States

With each epoch and softfork, we associate a deployment state. The possible states are:

> 1. DEFINED is the first state that each softfork starts. The genesis epoch is by definition in this state for each deployment.

Author: Maybe 0 epoch more clear.

2. STARTED for epochs past the `start_epoch`.
3. LOCKED_IN for one epoch after the first epoch period with STARTED epochs of which at least `threshold` has the associated bit set in `version`.
4. ACTIVE for all epochs after the LOCKED_IN epoch.
5. FAILED for one epoch period past the `timeout_epoch`, if LOCKED_IN was not reached.

### Bit flags

> The `version` block header field is to be interpreted as a 32-bit little-endian integer (as present), and bits are selected within this integer as values (1 << N) where N is the bit number.

Reviewer: > ... and bits are selected within this integer as values (1 << N) where N is the bit number.

Not sure what this sentence tries to express here.

Blocks in the STARTED state get a `version` whose bit position bit is set to 1. The top 3 bits of such blocks must be 001, so the range of possible `version` values is [0x20000000...0x3FFFFFFF], inclusive.

By restricting the top 3 bits to 001, we get 29 out of those for this proposal and support future upgrades for different mechanisms. When a block `version` does not have top bits 001, it is treated as if all bits are 0 for deployments.

Miners should continue setting the bit in the LOCKED_IN phase, so uptake is visible, though this does not affect consensus rules.

### New consensus rules
The new consensus rules for each softfork are enforced for each block with an ACTIVE state.

### State transitions

![State transitions](images/state-transitions.png)

> The genesis epoch has a state DEFINED for each deployment, by definition.

Reviewer: It seems "genesis epoch" means the beginning epoch of a softfork proposal in this RFC? If so I think it's a bad name 'cause it's easy to mix it with the epoch 0 of CKB chain.

Author: No, it does means the epoch 0 of CKB chain.
This proposal allowing multiple deploy in parallel, so multiple parallel deployments will have different states, but we specify that each deployment will start from DEFINED state, with genesis as the starting point, until reach the specified start_epoch, then the state will change to started.

```rust
if epoch.is_genesis() {
    return ThresholdState::DEFINED;
}
```

> We remain in the initial state until we reach the `start_epoch`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The deployment remains in the initial state until we reach the `start_epoch`.
```

```rust
match state {
    ThresholdState::DEFINED => {
        if epoch.number() >= start {
            next_state = ThresholdState::STARTED;
        }
    }
```

After an epoch in the STARTED state, we tally the bits set and transition to LOCKED_IN if a sufficient number of blocks in the past epoch set the deployment bit in their version numbers. If the threshold has not been met and we reach the `timeout_epoch`, we transition directly to FAILED.

Note that a block's state never depends on its version, only on that of its ancestors.

```rust
match state {
    ThresholdState::STARTED => {
        let mut count = 0;
        for block in (0..epoch_length) {
            if (block.version() & 0xE0000000 == 0x20000000 && (block.version() >> bit) & 1 == 1) {
                ++count;
            }
        }
        let threshold_number = threshold_number(epoch_length, threshold);
        if count >= threshold_number {
            next_state = ThresholdState::LOCKED_IN;
        } else if epoch_ext.number() >= timeout {
            next_state = ThresholdState::FAILED;
        }
    }

> ```

Reviewer: Is this check for `LOCKED_IN` run at the beginning of each epoch, or at each block?

Author: The state of the blocks in the same epoch is the same, and the state of the epoch depends on the previous epoch, i.e. we only count the previous epoch. So this check will only be done once per epoch and we cache cache the results.

> After at least one epoch of LOCKED_IN, we automatically transition to ACTIVE if the `minimum_activation_epoch` is reached. Otherwise, LOCKED_IN continues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After at least one epoch of LOCKED_IN, the deployment automatically transits to ACTIVE if the `minimum_activation_epoch` is reached. Otherwise, LOCKED_IN continues.
```

```rust
ThresholdState::LOCKED_IN => {
    if epoch.number() >= min_activation_epoch {
        next_state = ThresholdState::ACTIVE;
    }
}
```

Furthermore, ACTIVE and FAILED are terminal states in which a deployment stays once reached.

```rust
ThresholdState::FAILED | ThresholdState::ACTIVE => {
    // Nothing happens, these are terminal states.
}
```

### Warning mechanism

> To support upgrade warnings, an extra "unknown upgrade" is tracked, using the "implicit bit" mask = (version & ~expected_version) != 0. Mask will be non-zero whenever an unexpected bit is set in `version`. Whenever LOCKED_IN for the unknown upgrade is detected, the software should warn loudly about the upcoming softfork. It should warn even more loudly after the next epoch (when the unknown upgrade is in the ACTIVE state).

Reviewer: Does "the software" mean CKB node or wallet or something else? What does "warn loudly" mean?

> It should warn even more loudly after the next epoch (when the unknown upgrade is in the ACTIVE state).

Why the unknown upgrade is in ACTIVE in the "next epoch" of LOCKED_IN?

Reviewer: From my understanding, such an "unknown upgrade" can only triggered by miners setting a bit in `version` when that bit has no corresponding deployment info encoded in the CKB node. If so it can never be ACTIVE because it has no `minimum_activation_epoch' defined.

Author: Remove this section for now.
